Clear your mind of everything you "know" about substance addiction. For now, forget about:  the recovery group movement, the disease concept of addiction, brain chemistry, lousy recovery statistics, and nonsense-jargon like: denial, powerlessness, relapse, triggers, enabler, alcoholic, addict, hitting bottom,  and other recovery group movement concepts. Focus only on your use of alcohol and other drugs, and the painful consequences of drinking/using.

---
 

Focus on the obvious. If you're doing something harmful to yourself, wouldn't it be good to stop it? If you have trouble with moderation, why stop just one-day-at-a-time? Wouldn't it be wise to quit altogether?  
 
---
 

Right now, experiment with the idea of never drinking or using again. Never! Think of the pros and the cons. Listen! Listen to your own thoughts about quitting for good, and notice the mixture of feelings you have.  
---
 

Notice that you feel both ways about quitting. This is the meaning of the word, "addiction." On one hand you want to quit. But on the other hand, you would like to continue drinking or drugging as much as you want. Forever. You are ambivalent, feeling both ways. 
---
 

Your Addictive Voice (AV) is your body talking to you. In thoughts and feelings, your AV tells you to drink or use drugs. Your AV is the sole cause of your substance addiction. 

---
 
Your AV is the expression of your appetite or your desire for alcohol or drugs. That appetite originates in the biological, animal side of human nature, so we call it the Beast. 

---
 

It's like there are two of you, at cross purposes, in conflict. In mortal combat. 

---
 
Your Beast is ruthless. It cares for nothing you love. It wants only one thing. The high. Any reason will do -- good, bad, or indifferent. It will exploit any tragedy, take advantage of any good fortune, or ask for no reason at all. It drinks or uses for its own sake. To get high. To feel real good all over, from head to toe.  

---
 
Your Beast hides in the dark. You cannot see it, any more than you can see your own eyes. But you can feel it. Beasts have strong feelings! AVRT puts light on the Beast as it hides in the dark. It cannot tolerate for you to see it. It fears being seen for what it is: a rogue, animal desire. It knows that you can kill it -- once you see it. It fears you, and you can feel its fear.
  
---
 
Your Beast is a rogue appetite for pleasure,born of synthetic drugs.Your Beast expresses itself through your thoughts. It uses mental images you can see, and it uses the same thinking voice that you hear reading these words.It speaks with great authority because it is a survival drive.But it cannot act on its own.It needs pronouns.It needs you, your precious "I."Your Beast's favorite word is "I."Without that word, it is paralyzed.When your Beast wants a drink, you hear,"I want a drink."In AVRT, "It, not I, wants a drink/fix."Too bad for it.Do you want to continue drinking/using?Or, is that your Beast?

---

The Beast is a master of disguise.It seems to be you!But it is only an appetite for alcohol or drugs.You are not an appetite.What could be more impotent than mere desire?You are neither your beast brain, nor any kind of brain.You can say:"I am not my body!I am not an animal being!I am the owner of my body!I am the master of my body!I am a human being!"Humans dominate beastswithin or without.You are human,intelligent and versatile.Therefore, you have an enormous advantage over it.You control language.You make the rules in your head.You know right from wrong, and it doesn't.Best of all, only you control your muscles.The Beast knows only one answer to any question,one solution to any problem,one action for every occasion. Drink! Fix! Your beast is quadriplegic.

---

Your Beast can be anything that you can be in order to get what it wants. (Think of how your sex drive works.)

- Intelligent
- Friendly
- Educated
- Funny
- Determined
- Compassionate
- Clever
- Secretive
- Persistent
- Patient
- Ruthless
- Dictatorial
- Loving

But the Beast is a dumb thing, a party animal. Regardless of its disguise or how pleasant it feels, it only wants to drink or fix. It is your deadly enemy. Treat it as such.

---

First, think of never drinking or fixing again. Now, think of having a drink or fixing right now. Shift back and forth between quitting right now for good and drinking full blast forever. Notice what is happening to you as you shift back and forth. You are teasing your Beast with a delightful relapse. Then torturing it with lifetime abstinence. Shame on you.  

---

Beasts have feelings, just as you do.When you think about drinking or drugging,you may feel anxious.You know the likely, ugly consequences.But at the same time, it feels pleasantly aroused.Only you can remember the bad times.It remembers only the good times.It never learns.It will be jealous of people who drink or use without problemsIt will resent people who interfere with its supply.It will feel joyous when you consider drinking or using.It is horrified at the idea of never getting high again.It is very frightened of you.It wants to survive.It knows what you are capable of doing.

---

Your Beast is grateful for the recovery group movement. If you don't go to meetings and get a sponsor and do moral inventories and share and make amends and turn your entire life over to the endless process of recovery and keep coming back, you will drink! "WHOOPIE!" says the Beast. If you are powerless, then it can be your higher power for the rest of your life. 

It likes the disease idea, in which having a drink is called "having a relapse." It likes to have a place to mingle with other Beasts. It feels safe where right and wrong are replaced by addictive disease, and where commitment to permanent abstinence is a symptom of that same disease. It notices that few who attend meetings stay sober for very long, and gladly accepts that relapse is a normal part of recovery. 

It wants you to think your addiction is a mystery, a disease, a symptom of maladjustment, a spiritual deficiency, or anything but what it is: The ultimate self-indulgence.

---

-> one day at a time?

one day at a time:  One Day At A Time? How does your Beast feel about quitting alcohol or drugs just one day at a time? Compare that to quitting once, for all time! Feel your Beast cringe.  Better yet, how do you feel about staying sober, just one day at a time? (The word is "insecure.")  But how would you like to end your substance addiction for good? How would you like to get on with your life as a normal person who simply never drinks or uses?  (The word is "hope.")  

---

In Rational Recovery, we suggest that you make a Big Plan:a decision to totally abstain from alcohol and drugs,forever.A Big Plan is very simple,but not all that easy.For example, ask yourself,"Can I really make a decision right now thatI will never drink or use again? Never?"Now, listen to the answer you hear in your head.Yes, the one that says, "Never say never.You can't tell what you will do down the line."Once again, notice that uneasy feeling.If you are practicing AVRT, that voice and feeling is not you.It is your body talking to you through your Addictive Voice.Your Beast is just doing its job.It intends to survive,even if you do not.It is a worthy opponent,but humans prevail over beasts.Do you want to make a Big Plan?Are you ready to make a Big Plan?

---

Such suspense!To drink or not to drink.Ah, yes. That is the question! And listen to all the commotion in your head!"If I could make this decision, I wouldn't have a problem in the first place. I could say never, but I would just be lying to myself. And if I say never, and then go ahead and drink, I'll feel like a failure, so I would just be setting up a big fall for myself by saying never again. And who's to say that I have to abstain? Lots of psychologists say abstinence is unrealistic, and scientific studies show that many people with drinking problems learn to drink moderately. They kind of mature out of it. And even if I quit for good, how do I know my life would really be much better? I could see maybe six months, and if I was doing OK by then, it would be obvious that I would remain abstinent, because it would be stupid to start drinking again if things are going better because I'm not drinking. I might eventually have to give it up altogether, but right now I'm under incredible pressure from all sorts of things, and it wouldn't be good for me to undertake something as significant as a Big Plan without really giving it some serious consideration and picking a time when things are going along more steady than they are right now. And actually, things can go on this way for a while, like I mean nothing really terrible is happening, and I can live with myself even if others can't, and if I am careful to not really overdo it and drink more responsibly, I can still have some when I can really enjoy it without really causing big troubles. I know if certain things happen or if I get to feeling a certain way I will definitely drink, so there's no use being perfectionistic about this, and besides, I can cut back using some of the AVRT stuff to control how much rather than whether I drink.This AVRT is probably good for people with problems that are more serious, or actually less serious than my problems. Maybe if I get out to meetings that will settle me down and make me really conscious of the bad consequences of drinking and I can get some support there and maybe straighten some things out about me that are driving me to drink so crazily, sometimes. This Big Plan thing is too abrupt and there isn't really any proof it works because RR hasn't been around that long, and the experts are really divided about the best way to approach sobriety in the first place. Actually the Big Plan is probably the best idea of all, but it just doesn't come naturally, and there's no point in doing something unnatural because you can't live up to it down the line.""Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,"SAID THE BEAST!Definition review:Addictive Voice: Any thinking or feeling that supports the possibility of any future use of alcohol or drugs -- EVER.

---

There is only one possible time to make a Big Plan.Right now.In AVRT, time does not exist.We know that the Beast,which resides in the midbrain,has no perception of time.It lives as a speck suspended in eternity,with no memory except the memory of pleasure,and with no comprehension of the future,functioning in the endless nowto protect its supply of survival stuff.Therefore, now is neveran acceptable time to make a Big Plan.Your Beast's only fear is ofdeprivation of what it takes to survive.Its job is to block youfrom depriving itof alcohol or other drugs.It has been succeeding.

---

If you wait until tomorrow,it will still be now, only then.The decision will be no more easy then,than now.It would seem much easierto make a sincere commitmentto totally abstain for two hundred yearsthan to say never, ever again.Try it:Make a plan to resume drinking in two hundred years.Decide exactly what you will drink (or use) in 2196to celebrate two centuries of abstinence.See?The Beast is quite stupid,so you can trick it this way.But your Beast can live comfortably with a planfor two hundred years of abstinence,even though you will be dead by then.It just doesn't get the time part.It is functionally immortal,and doesn't understand that you will die.To your Beast, time is just a commodityto wear you down,to tire you out,to look for perfect opportunities,and to shorten the days,so that it will not suffer deprivation for long.Knowing that, you are armed for the kill.

---

Kill? In a manner of speaking, yes.Your Beast is a part of you,an intimate partthat has been with you for a long, long time.It has been with you during some ofthe best moments of your life,and some of the worst,always as a friend,to celebrate the good times,to relieve the humdrum times,to calm you and soothe you during the bad times,and to enrich the simple pleasures of life.It brings out the best in you,or so it seems at times.It is a companion for lonely times,and a coach for social times,a doctor who knows what's best for you,and a pal who really cares for you.It talks in "you" and "we,"just like any other friend,and it always has the perfect solutionfor any problem you ever have.How could you turn on your old friend,betray it when it has been so faithful to you?How could you kill such an innocent thing,that only means to help?

---

"Killing is too extreme," says the Beast. But look what it's done to you so far, And think of what it still can do to you. How far will you let it go? If you listen carefully, your Beast will reveal its innermost secret -- how to kill it. "Never say never," says the Beast. Get the message? 

---
 
Are you ready to make a Big Plan? It's entirely up to you. But the only time you can do it is right now. Why now? Because it's always now, silly. If you make a decision to quit tomorrow, it will still be "now," then. And once again, your Beast will say, "Why now? Why never? Why not just one day at a time?" And you can keep coming back to the problem, forever. Think it over. You need not respond immediately.

---

This is not an experiment. Here is how to make a Big Plan:

Half-hearted plans to quit for good won't do. It's all or nothing, like jumping off the high dive. There's no turning back.

Now, think about the meaning of each of these five words, "I will never drink/drug again."

"I" am in control of my muscles. 

Therefore, "I" call the shots. 

"Will" is just my ability to make a decision, which requires no power.

"Never" means eternity, forever, to the last star in the univere. 

"Drink/use" is what I will never do

"Again," which means that this decision is based on my past experience.

 
Feel the discomfort. That is your Beast, frightened of you, horrified at what you are planning. Now, think about why you are quitting for good. No new problems caused by drinking or using, a better life, better marriage, more education, health, money, normal relationships, whatever you hope for. Feel the hope. They are not an illusion, a false hope, or a pink cloud. Those feelings are you. Trust those feelings of hope.


---


Now, say the words slowly to yourself,with as much meaning as you can,"I will never drink/use again."Mean it!Trust that you will always be able to recognizean inner longing to drink or useas your deadly enemy.Be willing to let your "old friend" suffer and die.Look at your hands,which are necessary to consume alcohol or drugs.Understand that they are under your complete control at all times.Your Beast has no power over you;it is a quadriplegic which must appeal to youin order to convince you to drink or use.Wiggle your index finger.Now challenge your Beast to do the same.Ask yourself, "How bad (depressed, anxious, bored, angry, etc.)am I willing to get and still not drink/use?(Hint: Try, "As bad as I feel. That's how bad I can feel and still not drink or use.)Get it?
---



Listen for the echo!When you state your Big Plan,you will almost certainly hearsome serious commotion in your head.It may be angry commotion,or sadness, or fear,or bald cynicism like,"Oh, sure. A likely story.What a lie.What a lot of crap this AVRT is."That is your Beast in action,defending itself against the worst thing possible.You are threatening it, in effect, with death.Fortunately, it is not you.You will survive, but IT is certainly upset!Too bad.Now, complete your Big Plan by saying it again, with meaning.Only this time, add,"...and I will never change my mind."Your Beast will get the message.Humans naturally dominate Beasts, within or without.Congratulations on your Big Plan!

---

**AVRT is effortless.**

-  From here on, your task is simple. 
-  All you do is recognize any thinking or feeling that even remotely suggests that you will drink alcohol or use drugs again. 
-  The "R" is AVRT stands for recognition -- not "removal" or "reasoning against. Just recognize those feelings and thinking, the AV, and they will fall silent. Only when you engage in dialog with the AV, will you have "white knuckles." You owe your Beast no answers, no explanations, no nothing.  
-  Welcome your Addictive Voice and as a sign of health, and not of disease. Your Beast is a pleasure driven survival drive turned south by a synthetic drug that produces synthetic pleasure greater than your other survival drives, e.g., eating, ,sex, safety, even breathing. The desire to have a ball and feel good all over is no disease.    
-  It doesn't give up easily, and it is a strong opponent, but it is utterly powerless. When you feel it struggle within you, it is only your old enemy having a hard time with its new master -- you. Your Beast activity will taper off and within a matter of weeks or months abstinence will be effortless. From time to time, your AV will "spike," and you'll feel flooded with the desire to drink/use, and plans to drink/use will pop into your head uninvited. You have nothing to fear beause you are now objectively recognizing a desire that once seemed to be your own. What could be more impotent than mere desire?
-  AVRT-based recovery is exactly as difficult as you believe it will be, and it will take exactly as long to complete as you choose to make it. You are recovered at the moment you say you are, and others will eventually have to recognize that fact. Eventually. In the meantime, you should build bridges over troubled waters, back into relationships you've harmed, and back into hearts you've broken. 

**The I/it split **

-  **You are not your body, but the owner of your body. You have a dual, animal-human nature, and your bodily desire for the high-life has overtaken your human, family identity. It is not you that wants to drink/use, for you are not a physical being, but a being that exists only in human consciousness. If you feel deprived of your favorite fix, you aren't being deprived of anything, but your Beast sure is. Too bad for it! Poor thing. Rub it in. Gloat. AVRT-based recovery is recovery with an attitude!**
-  **If you aren't going to drink or use any more, what would your purpose be in attending recovery meetings?**
-  **You will be surprised and fascinated at how much of your thinking is actually your Addictive Voice. You may be stunned to discover how much recovery movement concepts have become part of your Addictive Voice, paving the way for more drinking or using. In fact, your Beast will use the 12-step program as its strongest ally. It will yearn for meetings and tell you that AA is absolutely right, that by taking personal responsibility for abstinence you are proving that you are a very sick person who will inevitably relapse.**

**AVRT can be summarized as a subroutine in a BASIC program:**

**1. I never drink.**

**2. "(anything thinking or feeling that supports drinking)"**

**3. Go to 1.**

**Stay away from recovery groups of all kinds, set your confidence for lifetime abstinence arbitrarily at 100%, recognize all self-doubt as your Addictive Voice. Let the Beast count time, and you'll do fine. **
